Blog post for grpc-dotnet release (#52)
grpc/grpc.io: content/blog/2019-09-23-grpc-on-dotnetcore.md

date: "2019-09-23T00:00:00Z"
published: true
title: .NET Core ❤ gRPC
url: blog/grpc-on-dotnetcore
---

_This is a guest post by [Sourabh Shirhatti](https://twitter.com/sshirhatti), a Program Manger on the .NET team at Microsoft._

The .NET team at Microsoft has been working in close collaboration with the gRPC team since November 2018 on a new fully managed implementation of gRPC for .NET Core.

We're pleased to announce that **grpc-dotnet** is now available with .NET Core 3.0 today!

## How to get it?

**grpc-dotnet** packages have just been released to [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/profiles/grpc-packages) and are already available for use in your projects. These packages also require the latest .NET Core 3.0 shared framework. You can download the .NET Core 3.0 SDK for your dev machine and build servers from the [.NET Core 3.0 download page](https://aka.ms/netcore3download) to acquire the shared framework. 

## Getting Started

gRPC templates are included as part of the .NET SDK. To get started, navigate to a console window after installing the SDK and run the following commands.

```sh
dotnet new grpc -o GrpcGreeter
cd GrpcGreeter
dotnet run
```

> To create a gRPC client and test with the newly created gRPC Greeter service, you can [follow the rest of this tutorial here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/tutorials/grpc/grpc-start?view=aspnetcore-3.0&tabs=visual-studio-code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a gRPC client and test with the newly created gRPC Greeter service, you can [follow the rest of this tutorial here](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/tutorials/grpc/grpc-start).
```

##  What's new?

Unlike the existing C-Core based implementation ([Grpc.Core](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/tree/master/src/csharp)), the new libraries ([grpc-dotnet](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet)) make use of the existing networking primitives in the .NET Core Base Class Libraries (BCL). The diagram below highlights the difference between the existing **Grpc.Core** library and the new **grpc-dotnet** libraries.

> <p><img src="/img/grpc-dotnet.svg" alt="gRPC .NET Stack" style="max-width: 800px" /></p>

Reviewer 2: in this image , "grpc is spelled as "gprc"

> On the server side, the `Grpc.AspNetCore.Server` package integrates into ASP.NET Core, allowing developers to benefit from ecosystem of common cross-cutting concerns of logging, configuration, dependency injection, authentication, authorization etc. which have already been solved by ASP.NET Core. Popular libraries in the ASP.NET ecosystem such as [Entity Framework Core (ORM)](https://github.com/aspnet/EntityFrameworkCore), [Serilog (Logging library)](https://github.com/serilog/serilog), and [Identity Server](https://github.com/IdentityServer/IdentityServer4) among others now work seamlessly with gRPC.

Reviewer 2: +1 but we should also mention  what's going to be the relationship of both implementations?  

I've tried to cover that in these paragraphs:
https://github.com/grpc/grpc/tree/master/src/csharp#grpc-c

Also, some key points are mentioned here
https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet#the-plan (the sections probably needs to get updated, but it's still mostly true).

We should probably provide a comparison table of both implementations because so far that's not something we've documented (e.g. grpc-dotnet is a winner in terms of smooth integration with ASP.NET Core but it's missing some features that Grpc.Core provides and also requires .NET Core 3 etc.). I think an accurate picture of the reality is that while grpc-dotnet is definitely a big step forward and something to be really excited about, there are pros and cons associated with the both implementations. That's also why we are providing the compatible API to allow users to flow between Grpc.Core and grpc-dotnet. 

One option is to come up with the comparison doc separately and make this blog post link to comparison of Grpc.Core vs grpc-dotnet (btw, that doc is something that should be updated continously as we implement new features, so it probably should be separate from this blogpost).

Author: I agree with your assessment that the comparison doc should be a living document that's frequently updated. Let's do that separately and leave this blog post as a point in time document.

I did however really like the verbiage you've used around introducing the two different implementations and I'll try and incorporate some of that in here

Author: @jtattermusch Do you prefer this?

Reviewer 2: @shirhatti  looking pretty good now. Thanks!

> On the client side, the `Grpc.Net.Client` package builds upon the familiar `HttpClient` API that ships as part of .NET Core. As with the server, gRPC clients greatly benefit from the ecosystem of packages that build upon `HttpClient`. It is now possible to use existing packages such as [**Polly**(Resilience and fault-handling library)](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly) and [HttpClientFactory(manage HTTPClient lifetimes)](https://github.com/aspnet/Extensions/tree/master/src/HttpClientFactory) with gRPC clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the client side, the `Grpc.Net.Client` package builds upon the familiar `HttpClient` API that ships as part of .NET Core. As with the server, gRPC clients greatly benefit from the ecosystem of packages that build upon `HttpClient`. It is now possible to use existing packages such as [**Polly**(Resilience and fault-handling library)](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly) and [HttpClientFactory(manage HTTPClient lifetimes)](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/http-requests) with gRPC clients.
```

The diagram below captures the exhaustive list of all new .NET packages for gRPC and their relationship with the existing packages.

<p><img src="/img/grpc-dotnet-packages.svg" alt="grpc-dotnet packages" style="max-width: 800px" /></p>

> In addition to the new published packages that ship as part of **grpc-dotnet**, we've also made improvements that benefit both stacks. There have been improvements to the existing packages including a more cohesive experience when working in Visual Studio especially around design-time build.

Reviewer: Call out syntax highlighting in VS and VS Code? Can add a screenshot of it in action. It's nice to show off a feature that people can just *see*.

Author: It's only VS, not VS Code. Still worth mentioning?

Reviewer: Up to you! I take any change I can get to add pictures to blog posts to make them visually engaging :D

Author: Done!

---
author: Sourabh Shirhatti
author-link: https://twitter.com/sshirhatti
date: "2019-09-23T00:00:00Z"
published: true
title: .NET Core ❤ gRPC
url: blog/grpc-on-dotnetcore
---

_This is a guest post by [Sourabh Shirhatti](https://twitter.com/sshirhatti), a Program Manger on the .NET team at Microsoft._

The .NET team at Microsoft has been working in close collaboration with the gRPC team since November 2018 on a new fully managed implementation of gRPC for .NET Core.

We're pleased to announce that **grpc-dotnet** is now available with .NET Core 3.0 today!

## How to get it?

**grpc-dotnet** packages have just been released to [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/profiles/grpc-packages) and are already available for use in your projects. These packages also require the latest .NET Core 3.0 shared framework. You can download the .NET Core 3.0 SDK for your dev machine and build servers from the [.NET Core 3.0 download page](https://aka.ms/netcore3download) to acquire the shared framework. 

## Getting Started

> gRPC templates are included as part of the .NET SDK. To get started, navigate to a console window after installing the SDK and run the following commands.

Reviewer 2: optional suggestion:  As a .NET user, now seeing gRPC project template being shipped as integral part of .NET SDK is a big deal and it's a milestone to be excited about. IMHO the sentence "gRPC templates are included as part of the .NET SDK." comes out a as bit dry formulation of what many will consider big news. I wouldn't be afraid of trying to make that sentence sound a bit more exciting.  (sth in the sense - "That's right, this is the first time gRPC becomes a first-class citizen in the .NET ecosystem and is a technology endorsed by Microsoft" - you get the point). This is just an idea, leaving up to you.

Author: I've made sure to use the phrase first-class citizen 😄

```sh
dotnet new grpc -o GrpcGreeter
cd GrpcGreeter
dotnet run
```

To create a gRPC client and test with the newly created gRPC Greeter service, you can [follow the rest of this tutorial here](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/tutorials/grpc/grpc-start).

## Doesn't gRPC already work with .NET Core?

There are currently two official implementations of gRPC for .NET:

- [**Grpc.Core**](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/tree/master/src/csharp): The original gRPC C# implementation based on the native gRPC Core library.
- [**grpc-dotnet**](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet): The new implementation written entirely in C# with no native dependencies and based on the newly released .NET Core 3.0.

The implementations coexist side-by-side and each has its own advantages in terms of available features, integrations, supported platforms, maturity level and performance. Both implementations share the same API for invoking and handling RPCs, thus limiting the lock-in and enabling users to choose the implementation that satisfies their needs the best.

##  What's new?

> Unlike the existing C-Core based implementation ([Grpc.Core](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/tree/master/src/csharp)), the new libraries ([grpc-dotnet](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet)) make use of the existing networking primitives in the .NET Core Base Class Libraries (BCL). The diagram below highlights the difference between the existing **Grpc.Core** library and the new **grpc-dotnet** libraries.

Reviewer 2: optional nit: "...make use of the existing networking primitives in the .NET Core Base Class Libraries (BCL)"  for more context, also mention that grpc-dotnet relies on the newly added HTTP/2 support in .NET Core 3 which is also the reason why something like this wasn't possible before?

Author: It felt unnatural adding it based on how the blog is currently structured, so I've omitted this.

> <p><img src="/img/grpc-dotnet.svg" alt="gRPC .NET Stack" style="max-width: 800px" /></p>

Reviewer 2: I think the image is slightly less informative than it could be, but fair enough.

Optional suggestions:
- make it clear that the HTTP/2 support in grpc-dotnet  comes from ASP.NET Core 
- the "gRPC C-Core Server + Interop layer"  could be "gRPC C-Core native library"
- it's not fully clear from the picture that gRPC C-core actually implements the HTTP/2 stack (not necessary to know, but maybe useful to know).

but also fine as is, maybe it's a question of taste.

Author: I tried to make it as similar to https://grpc.io/blog/grpc-stacks/ as possible. I don't want to change it and inundate folks with information. I figured if you're familiar with gRPC, you probably are already acquainted with how the C-Core server works

On the client side, the `Grpc.Net.Client` package builds upon the familiar `HttpClient` API that ships as part of .NET Core. As with the server, gRPC clients greatly benefit from the ecosystem of packages that build upon `HttpClient`. It is now possible to use existing packages such as [**Polly**(Resilience and fault-handling library)](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly) and [HttpClientFactory(manage HTTPClient lifetimes)](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/http-requests) with gRPC clients.

The diagram below captures the exhaustive list of all new .NET packages for gRPC and their relationship with the existing packages.

<p><img src="/img/grpc-dotnet-packages.svg" alt="grpc-dotnet packages" style="max-width: 800px" /></p>

In addition to the new published packages that ship as part of **grpc-dotnet**, we've also made improvements that benefit both stacks. There have been improvements to the existing packages including a more cohesive experience when working in Visual Studio especially around design-time build and language grammar support for protocol buffers.

> <p><img src="/img/grpc-visualstudio.png" alt="gRPC in Visual Studio 2019" /></p>

Reviewer 2: optional: Picture is good, but perhaps needs a bit more context. I can see that the grammar is being highlighted,
but from just the picture I don't see any more features.
Perhaps add a picture description "gRPC project in Visual Studio 2019, beyond the .proto being syntax highlighted, the generated client/server code is immediately updated as soon .proto file is saved in the IDE and the changes are picked up by IntelliSense code completion..."
